---
title: "[心理學] Consciousness as a Controlled Hallucination | Dr. Shamil Chandaria "
excerpt: "大腦不是直接感知世界(direct, unfiltered access to reality is a misconception)，而是基於過往經驗不斷構建內部模型來預測未來，並通過比對預測與實際的偏差（generates a controlled hallucination that is trying to minimize the prediction error with the actual sensory data）來學習、更新認知，而感知失衡則可能導致精神疾病。預測模型過於強勢易導致精神分裂（schizophrenia; override reality），過於弱勢易導致自閉症（autism; repetitive behaviors）. "
collection: portfolio
---

大腦不是直接感知世界(direct, unfiltered access to reality is a misconception)，而是基於過往經驗不斷構建內部模型來預測未來，並通過比對預測與實際的偏差（generates a controlled hallucination that is trying to minimize the prediction error with the actual sensory data）來學習、更新認知，而感知失衡則可能導致精神疾病。預測模型過於強勢易導致精神分裂（schizophrenia; override reality），過於弱勢易導致自閉症（autism; repetitive behaviors）

## 正文

The brain has to somehow generate this internal representation of what you're seeing. Basically, what any organism has to do is take their sensory data—their visual data, their auditory data, the somatic sensory data of feeling and touch—and construct an idea of what's really going on. Because, of course, the brain is just enclosed in this bony skull, and the only things going into the brain are time series data carried mostly through nerves. And somehow, in this dark, bony cavity, we are generating some sort of conscious experience. So, how does that happen?

Well, there is a technically, mathematically optimal way of taking data and trying to figure out what's going on, and that's called Bayesian inference. The way it works is: you're looking out the window, and you have lots of sensory data. What you're trying to do is to figure out, "What's the probability that this is a tree, given my sensory data?" Okay, so that's called the posterior—that's what we're trying to figure out. And it turns out you use Bayes' theorem for that. Bayes' theorem, roughly speaking, says: to calculate the probability that that's a tree given my sensory data, the way you do it is you have to kind of go backwards. You have to say that equals the probability that I got this particular sensory data if it was indeed a tree, times the prior probability that there are trees in general—which is reasonably good. That whole thing is divided by a normalizing term, which is, in general, the probability that I get this kind of sensory data.

Now, that Bayesian inference turns out to be what's called computationally explosive. So we can't actually calculate it, because to calculate it you would have to figure out every single hypothesis of where the data is coming from, including—you know—it's a tree, it's an alien spacecraft, it's a snake, everything. And you can't do that. So, both in AI and in biology, in evolution, we have to do something called approximate Bayesian inference. And here was the clever hack that was figured out by evolution—and this is exactly what we're doing in machine learning, in AI. The hack is: okay, so let me guess at what's going on. Let me guess at what's going on. You know, you start off guessing as a baby, and the guesses aren't that great, but as you go on, your guesses get better and better.

What you do is you sort of have this neural network, with you know, coming in from the edges of your brain where the visual processing—early visual processing—is happening, for example. And you feed forward and say, "Oh, looks like it's a tree." Okay, that's the basic idea. But in fact, what's really going on is that you've got this idea that it could be a tree, but now the brain says, "Okay, let's imagine—let's actually imagine that it is a tree." Now, the brain fills in the entire picture and guesses exactly what's going on, using its prior probabilities, using its best estimates. And then, to make sure that we're not just making it up, what we then do is compare the little bit of sensory data that I got—you know, this ridiculously small amount of the visual field with a few photoreceptors—and compare that sensory data with the output of your simulation of this guess model, right? And you compare your simulation with these few pieces of sensory data. And then what you do is you adjust your simulation—your internal mental model of what's going on. **You adjust the parameters, the dials and knobs and switches of that simulation, to minimize the prediction error, to minimize the difference between the output of your generative model—that's the simulation, the generative model—and your sensory data. And that's called the prediction error.** And as you minimize this, what **you end up with is a generative model, an internal simulation, if you like, a hallucination**. But it's a hallucination which is a special hallucination, which is **a hallucination that is trying to minimize the prediction error with the actual sensory data**. In other words, it's **a controlled hallucination**.

And then we get this very important hypothesis, which I call the neurophenomenological hypothesis. Big word, but very important. Let me spell it out: neurophenomenological. Basically, it means that our conscious experience is in fact our internal model—or some part of our internal model; some parts we may not be conscious of—but we are experiencing our internal model. **In fact, we are not experiencing the world as it is in itself. That's a philosophical conundrum—we've never actually seen the world as it is in itself. We are living in our own internal simulation, like a video game** if you think about it, right? And **in this internal simulation, we have to represent ourselves as well. So this representation is, in fact, an avatar within my own internal simulation, within my own internal generative model.** And **the idea of "me" and my narrative self, and my social self, and my bodily feelings—these are all combined to make sense of an internal model**. It's very important to have an internal what's called a "phenomenal self model"—meaning a kind of internal conscious self model. It's very important to have that because, from an evolutionary perspective, you know, if there's a tiger running towards me, I need to know where I am and that the tiger's over there, and then I can jump up that tree over there. So it's a good data structure, within my generative model, to make sure I have a model of the agent itself. And funnily enough, even the idea that we are acting is a part of this agent model.

There are other parts of this generative model. A philosopher named Immanuel Kant, a couple of hundred years ago, actually figured out that we also have to have a concept of space and time and causality to organize our sensory data. So we're bringing all of this to our internal generative model. So **we are simulating this world with data structures—or they're called "hyperpriors," you know, these top-level beliefs—using space, time, causality, and an internal phenomenal self model.**

Now, that's a very strange situation, and there are a couple of things to note there. The first thing is that we've got a kind of weird error or an illusion going on. Which is that, in fact, this whole experience, this whole conscious model, is happening within us, but we think we are this avatar inside the model. So we've taken ourselves to be this little "me" inside of our awareness. That's the first thing that is kind of strange. And the second thing that's kind of strange is that we believe it's all real. "This is the real me, that's the real tree, this is the real bottle," right? It's really a bottle, it's not a kind of representation of a bottle, but it's real. And the philosophical word that we use for "real" is that we have reified this object—we believe it's the real object.

Now, what happens when we start to meditate? We come to see, first of all, that "Huh, I am not my thoughts," because we can come to sort of **observe our thoughts arising, and body sensations arising, and emotions arising**. And if we're observing them arise, you know, they're not us. And we also come to notice that those are kind of—as we really tune into them—we can come to notice that those are made of fine, vibratory sensations. We can start to deconstruct them. We can start to see that these body sensations and these thoughts are fleeting and impermanent. **Not only are they not us, but they're fleeting and impermanent, and shimmering and diaphanous, and almost like fog, or have a dream-like quality.** There's **a technical Buddhist word called "emptiness"**—a very good word, actually. Some people don't like it; I actually like it. I think it's a wonderful word. And we come to see that all the phenomena are empty. They're impermanent, they're diaphanous, they're almost translucent and transparent.

What we come to see in meditation is that, in fact, what we take to be real is not really real. In neuroscience and philosophical terms, we tend to call that we have "de-reified" the objects—they no longer are real. And of course, seeing these objects as empty, or de-reified, is very important. But the most shockingly important part of the meditation process is to see ourselves—all the various components of ourselves, of the phenomenal self model—as empty. That they are de-reified; they're also not real, they're just constructions. It doesn't mean they're not there, doesn't mean that they disappear, or that thoughts disappear, or that body sensations or emotions disappear. It's just that they become empty, and the whole notion of being identified with them starts breaking down.

And at that stage, something pretty amazing can happen. Which is that we can come to see that all of this experience—all this arising, these thoughts, these body sensations, this sound, this visual field—are all arising within a space of awareness, or a space of perception. And that it's all constructed, and that who we take ourselves to be is kind of empty as well. And then we can **wake up—like becoming lucid within a dream**, that's an analogy. We can become lucid within our own generative model.

Original source: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y_s2HrjgUKA
